\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id$
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename cgdb.info
@include version.texi
@settitle CGDB Manual @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header
@copying

This manual is for @acronym{GNU} CGDB
(version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
the @acronym{GNU} ncurses based front end to GDB.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011 CGDB Team

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* CGDB: (CGDB).                   GNU Ncurses front end to GDB.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title CGDB
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Bob Rossi (@email{bob@@brasko.net})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top CGDB
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Summary::                     Summary of CGDB

* Invocation::                  Getting in and out of CGDB
* Understanding CGDB::          Understanding the core concepts of CGDB
* Controlling CGDB::            CGDB commands
* Configuring CGDB::            CGDB configuration commands
* Highlighting Groups::         CGDB highlighting groups
* Key User Interface::          CGDB key user interface
* Sending I/O to Inferior::     Sending I/O to the program being debugged
* Terminal Control Flow::       Allowing terminal control flow in CGDB

* Building CGDB::               Building CGDB from source

* Copying This Manual::

* Index::
@end menu


@node Summary
@unnumbered Summary of CGDB

CGDB is a curses-based interface to the GNU Debugger (GDB).  The goal of CGDB 
is to be lightweight and responsive; not encumbered with unnecessary features.

The interface is designed to deliver the familiar GDB text interface, with a 
split screen showing the source as it executes.  The UI is modeled on the 
classic Unix text editor, vi.  Those familiar with vi should feel right at 
home using CGDB.

The library responsible for communicating with GDB is called Trivial GDB 
(tgdb, or more accurately, libtgdb).  This abstraction allows the UI code to 
be independent of the debugger, as well as greatly simplifying its 
implementation.

Those wanting to develop other interfaces to GDB are welcome to use libtgdb 
as the basis for their program.  Many of the headaches of parsing GDB's output 
and annotations can be avoided by using it.

Some features offered by CGDB are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Syntax-highlighted source window

@item
Visual breakpoint setting

@item
Keyboard shortcuts for common functions

@item
Searching source window (using regexp)
@end itemize

@node Invocation
@chapter Getting In and Out of CGDB
@cindex invocation CGDB

This chapter discusses how to start CGDB, and how to get out of it.
The essentials are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
type @samp{cgdb} to start CGDB.

@item
type @kbd{quit} or @kbd{C-d} in the GDB window to exit.

@item
type @kbd{:quit} in the source window to exit.  This even works if GDB is 
currently hanging, or operating a long command.
@end itemize

@node Understanding CGDB
@chapter Understanding the core concepts of CGDB
@cindex understanding CGDB

@cindex status bar
@cindex CGDB mode
@cindex GDB mode
@cindex TTY mode
The CGDB user interface currently consists of two windows and a status bar.  
The source window is currently on the top and the GDB window is on the 
bottom.  The @dfn{status bar} currently separates the two windows.

The interface has several modes depending on which window is focused.  
@dfn{CGDB mode} is when the source window is focused, @dfn{GDB mode} is when 
the GDB window is focused and @dfn{TTY mode} is when the TTY window is focused.

Beginning with CGDB version 1.0, the windows are movable,
and the user will be able to create as many or as few that is desired. 
Currently however, all of my time is spent developing the interface between
CGDB and GDB. Once this is complete, the UI of CGDB will become much more 
polished.  If you are a ncurses developer, and have spare time to work on this
task, please contact me.

@menu
* Source Window::               Understanding the source window.
* GDB Window::                  Understanding the GDB window.
* File Dialog Window::          Understanding the file dialog window.
* TTY Window::                  Understanding the TTY window.
* Status Bar::                  Understanding the status bar.
* Switching Windows::           Switching between windows.
@end menu

@node Source Window
@section Understanding the source window.
@cindex source window

The @dfn{source window} is the window that provides you a view of the source 
code that the debugged program is made up of.  It will display to the user a 
single source file at a time.  While the user is debugging, via @code{next} 
and @code{step}, CGDB will update the source file and line number to keep you 
informed as to where GDB is debugging.

CGDB has several features that make debugging easier than using plain old GDB.  
One feature you will notice right away while debugging a C, C++ or ADA program, 
is that the source files are syntax highlighted.  This allows the user to 
easily navigate through the source file to look for certain places in the 
source code.  If you would like to see another source language highlighted, 
contact us.  To understanding how to navigate through the source window look
at the commands in @ref{CGDB Mode}.

In addition to showing the source code, CGDB also displays to the user the 
currently executing line. The line number will be highlighted green, to
represent that the particular line, is the current line being debugged by GDB.
Also, CGDB will display an arrow extending from the line number, to the 
source line.  You can configure what type of arrow CGDB uses with the
@code{:set arrowstyle} configuration option. By default, the @code{short}
arrow is used.  However, my personal favorite is the @code{long} arrow.

As you navigate through the source window, the current line the cursor is
on will be highlighted white.  This simply helps you keep track of where you
are in the file.

Also, you can set or delete breakpoints in CGDB from the source window.  Simply
navigate to the line that you are interested in setting a breakpoint, and hit
the space bar.  This will set a breakpoint on the line if one did not already 
exist.  The line number should turn red to indicate that a breakpoint has 
been set.  Hitting the space bar again will delete the breakpoint.  If you 
disable the breakpoint, the line number will turn yellow, to represent the
disabled breakpoint.

@cindex regular expression search
CGDB also supports regular expression searching within the source window.  If
you type @kbd{/} or @kbd{?} you can search in the source window for a string
of interest.  The C library regular expression functions are used to perform 
this search, which honors things like @samp{*} or @samp{+}.

The full list of commands that are available in the source window is in
@ref{CGDB Mode}.

@node GDB Window
@section Understanding the GDB window.
@cindex GDB window

@cindex GDB window
The @dfn{GDB window} is how CGDB allows the user to interface with the GNU 
debugger.  If you wish to pass a command to GDB, simply type it into this 
window and GDB will receive the command.  This interface is intended to be 
100% identical to using GDB on a terminal.

There is a limited set of keys that can be typed into this window that CGDB
interprets and handles, instead of sending to GDB.  They are all available in
@ref{GDB Mode}.

CGDB attempts to buffer commands the same way they would be if you typed them
at the terminal.  So, if you type several commands before a single one 
finishes, they will each be run in order.  There will be no way to stop these
commands from being run besides from typing @kbd{Ctrl-C}, like you would at any
normal terminal when working with GDB.

@node File Dialog Window
@section Understanding the file dialog window.
@cindex file dialog window

@cindex file dialog window
The @dfn{file dialog window} is available to help the user view and select 
which file they would like to view.  It provides the user with a list of all 
the files that make up the program being debugged.  If there are no files 
available, because there is no program being debugged or because there is
no debug symbols, then the file dialog will not open and a message will be 
displayed at the status bar.

You can get to the file dialog by hitting @code{o} when you are at the source
window.  Once you enter the file dialog, it is possible to leave it by hitting 
@code{q}.  You can navigate the file dialog using the standard direction keys
and you can even use regular expression to find your file.  This can save a 
lot of time as the number of files grow.

The full list of commands that are available in the source window is in
@ref{File Dialog Mode}.

@node TTY Window
@section Understanding the TTY window.
@cindex tty window

@cindex TTY window
The @dfn{TTY window} is available to allow the user to pass input to the program 
being debugged. This window will act similar to the GDB window, except that
the data you type will get sent to the program being debugged.  
@xref{Sending I/O to Inferior}.

You will notice that the TTY window has a terminal device between it and the 
program being debugged.  So, if the program being debugged uses say readline, 
which allows command line editing, the same interface will be provided via the
TTY window as at the terminal.  You can see the name of the terminal device 
in the TTY status bar.

The full list of commands that are available in the source window is in
@ref{TTY Mode}.

Sending I/O to the program being debugged can be confusing.  It is described
better in @ref{Sending I/O to Inferior}.  Unless the I/O with the program
being debugged is simple, I usually prefer starting the application on a
separate terminal and attaching to it with CGDB.

@node Status Bar
@section Understanding the status bar.
@cindex status bar

@cindex status bar
The @dfn{status bar} is the general purpose way for CGDB to show the user 
which commands they are currently typing or report errors to the user when 
they occur.  CGDB does not use popup's or other forms of I/O to alert the 
user of information or problems.

While CGDB is running, you can configure it with any of the commands that 
are valid in CGDB's configuration file.  Simply type @kbd{:} in the source 
window, and you will see the colon, and the rest of the command you type 
appear in the status bar.  When you are finished typing the command that 
you are interested in, type @code{enter}.  This will alert CGDB to execute 
the command.  If at any point you would like to cancel the current
command typed so far, type the cgdb mode key.  This will put you back
into CGDB mode.  For a description of the cgdb mode key, see 
@ref{Switching Windows}.

The full list of commands that are available in the source window is in
@ref{Configuring CGDB}.

@node Switching Windows
@section Switch between windows
@cindex switch between windows

When CGDB is invoked, the interface is in @dfn{GDB mode}.  A @samp{*} at the 
right of the status bar indicates that input will be passed to GDB.  To change
the focus to the source window, hit the @key{ESC} key.  The 
@dfn{cgdb mode key} is the key that is responsible for switching the user
into @dfn{CGDB mode} from a different mode.  The cgdb mode 
key is defaulted to the @key{ESC} key.  To change this value, look at the 
configuration options for CGDB.  @xref{Configuring CGDB}.

The interface is now in @dfn{CGDB mode}.  To switch back into @dfn{GDB mode}, 
press @kbd{i}.  This syntax is based on the popular Unix text-editor, vi.

@node Controlling CGDB
@chapter CGDB commands
@cindex controlling CGDB

CGDB can be controlled in a variety of different ways.  Each mode that CGDB 
is in acts differently. Currently CGDB implicitly changes modes depending on 
which window is active.  The following information will help you determine 
what commands are accessible during which modes.

@menu
* CGDB Mode::                   Commands available during CGDB mode
* GDB Mode::                    Commands available during GDB mode
* File Dialog Mode::            Commands available during the file dialog mode
* TTY Mode::                    Commands available during TTY mode
@end menu

@node CGDB Mode
@section Commands available during CGDB mode
@cindex commands, in CGDB mode

When you are in the source window, you are implicitly in @dfn{CGDB mode}.  
All of the below commands are available during this mode.  This mode is 
primarily available for the user to view the current source file, search it, 
or switch to a different mode.

@table @kbd
@item cgdbmodekey
Puts the user into command mode. However, you are already in this mode.
This is defaulted to the @key{ESC} key.

@item i
Puts the user into @dfn{GDB mode}.

@item I
Puts the user into @dfn{TTY mode}.

@item T
Opens a window to give input to the debugged program.

@item Ctrl-T
Opens a new tty for the debugged program.

@item k
@itemx up arrow
Move up a line.

@item j
@itemx down arrow
Move down a line.

@item h
@itemx left arrow
Move left a line.

@item l
@itemx right arrow
Move right a line.

@item Ctrl-b
@itemx page up
Move up a page.

@item Ctrl-u
Move up 1/2 a page.

@item Ctrl-f
@itemx page down
Move down a page.

@item Ctrl-d
Move down 1/2 a page.

@item gg
Move to the top of file.

@item G
Move to the bottom of file.

@item /
search from current cursor position.

@item ?
reverse search from current cursor position.

@item n
next forward search.

@item N
next reverse search.

@item o
open the file dialog.

@item spacebar
Sets a breakpoint at the current line number.

@item t
Sets a temporary breakpoint at the current line number.

@item -
Shrink source window 1 line.

@item =
Grow source window 1 line.

@item _
Shrink source window 25% (or, shrink tty window 1 line, if visible).

@item +
Grow source window 25% (or, grow tty window 1 line, if visible).

@item Ctrl-l
Clear and redraw the screen.

@item F5
Send a run command to GDB.

@item F6
Send a continue command to GDB.

@item F7
Send a finish command to GDB.

@item F8
Send a next command to GDB.

@item F10
Send a step command to GDB.
@end table

@node GDB Mode
@section Commands available during GDB mode
@cindex commands, in GDB mode

When in @dfn{GDB mode}, the user is mostly interested in working with the GDB 
console.  That is, sending commands to GDB and receiving data back from GDB.
Almost all data passed into this window is directly sent to readline and then
to GDB.

It is important to understand that CGDB parses the keys entered in
the GDB window and has the first chance at dealing with them.  If it is
interested in the keys, it will handle them. Below is a list of keys that
CGDB is interested in, and does not pass along any further.

@table @kbd
@item cgdbmodekey
Switch back to source window.  This is defaulted to the @key{ESC} key.

@item page up
Move up a page.

@item page down
Move down a page.

@item F11
Go to the beginning of the GDB buffer.

@item F12
Go to the end of the GDB buffer.
@end table

Any other keys, besides the ones above, CGDB is currently not interested in.  
CGDB will pass along these keys to the readline library. When readline has 
determined that a command has been received, it alerts CGDB, and a command is
then sent to GDB. This is the same method used when invoking GDB directly.

@node File Dialog Mode
@section Commands available during the file dialog mode
@cindex commands, in File Dialog mode

The file dialog is primarily used to allow the user to find and open a source
file that the program they are debugging is made up of.  The file dialog will
be full screen, and will list each file that the debugged program is made up 
of.  A usual instance of the file dialog would be to open it up from the 
source window using the @kbd{o} key, and then to search for the file of 
interest. If you are looking for foo.c type @code{/foo.c}, press @kbd{enter} 
once to finish the regular expression and again to select the file.

The commands available in the file dialog are:

@table @kbd
@item q
Will exit the file dialog, and return to the source window.

@item k
@itemx up arrow
Move up a line.

@item j
@itemx down arrow
Move down a line.

@item h
@itemx left arrow
Move left a line.

@item l
@itemx right arrow
Move right a line.

@item Ctrl-b
@itemx page up
Move up a page.

@item Ctrl-f
@itemx page down
Move down a page.

@item /
search from current cursor position.

@item ?
reverse search from current cursor position.

@item n
next forward search.

@item N
next reverse search.

@item enter
Select the current file.
@end table

@node TTY Mode
@section Commands available during TTY mode
@cindex commands, in TTY mode

@table @kbd
@item cgdbmodekey
Switch back to source window. This is defaulted to the @key{ESC} key.
@item page up
Move up a page.

@item page down
Move down a page.

@item F11
Go to the beginning of the GDB buffer.

@item F12
Go to the end of the GDB buffer.
@end table

@node Configuring CGDB
@chapter CGDB configuration commands
@cindex configuring CGDB

There may be several features that you find useful in CGDB.  CGDB is capable
of automating any of these commands through the use of the config file called
@file{cgdbrc}.  It looks in @env{$HOME}@file{/.cgdb/} for that file.  If it 
exists, CGDB executes each line in the file in order.  It is as if the user 
typed in all the commands into the status bar after the tui was initialized.

The following variables change the behavior of some aspect of CGDB.  Many
of these commands may be abbreviated in some way, and all boolean commands
my be negated by appending @samp{no} to the front.  For example: 
@kbd{:set ignorecase} turns on case-insensitive searching; while
@kbd{:set noignorecase} turns on case-sensitive searching.

@table @kbd
@item :set as=@var{style}
@itemx :set arrowstyle=@var{style}
Set the arrow style to @var{style}.  Possible values for @var{style}
are @samp{short}, @samp{long}, and @samp{highlight}.  Changes the style of 
the arrow that is used to indicate the currently executing line in the source 
viewer.  The default value is short.  A longer arrow is available, for easier 
readability.  Finally, the @samp{highlight} option draws no arrow at all, 
instead drawing the entire line in inverse video.

@item :set asr
@itemx :set autosourcereload
If this is on, CGDB will automatically reload a source file if it has 
changed since CGDB has opened it.  If it is off, the file will never be 
reloaded, until you start CGDB again. The default is on.
This feature is useful when you are debugging a program, then you modify 
a source file, recompile, and type @kbd{r} in GDB's CLI window. The file in 
this case will be updated to show the new version.  Note, CGDB only looks at 
the timestamp of the source file to determine if it has changed. So if 
you modify the source file, and didn't recompile yet, CGDB will still 
pick up on the changes.

@item :set cgdbmodekey=@var{key}
This option is used to determine what key puts CGDB into @dfn{CGDB Mode}.
By default, the @kbd{ESC} key is used.  @var{key} can be any normal key
on the keyboard.  It can also be any keycode, as long as the keycode notation 
is used.  This option is especially useful when the user wants to use
readline in vi mode.  If the user types @code{set cgdbmodekey=<PageUp>} 
then the @kbd{Page Up} key will put CGDB into CGDB mode and the @kbd{ESC}
key will flow through to readline.

@item :set ic
@itemx :set ignorecase
Sets searching case insensitive.  The default is off.

@item :set stc
@itemx :set showtgdbcommands
If this is on, CGDB will show all of the commands that it sends to GDB. 
If it is off, CGDB will not show the commands that it gives to GDB. 
The default is off. 

@item :set syn=@var{style}
@itemx :set syntax=@var{style}
Sets the current highlighting mode of the current file to have the syntax 
@var{style}.  Possible values for @var{syntax} are @samp{c}, @samp{ada}, and 
@samp{off}.  Normally, the user will never have to do this, since CGDB 
automatically detects what syntax a file should be based on its file 
extension.  However, this feature can currently be useful for debugging 
purposes.

@item :set to
@itemx :set timeout
This option is used along with the @var{ttimeout} option to determine the 
behavior CGDB should have when it receives part of a mapped key sequence or 
a keyboard code sequence.  If this option is on, CGDB will time out on both
user defined mappings and on key codes from the keyboard.  If this option 
is off, user defined mappings will not be timed out on.  In this case, CGDB
will determine if it should time out on key codes from the keyboard by
examining the @var{ttimeout} option.  To determine how CGDB will time out
on mappings and key codes, and what time out lengths CGDB will use, please 
refer to the chart in @ref{Key User Interface}.  The default value for this
option is on.

@item :set tm=@var{delay}
@itemx :set timeoutlen=@var{delay}
This option is used along with the @var{ttimeoutlen} option.  It 
represents the number of milliseconds that CGDB should wait for a key code
from the keyboard or for a mapped key sequence to complete.  If @var{delay} is 
0, CGDB immediately accepts each character it receives.  This will prevent any
mappings or key codes to complete.  @var{delay} may be any value between 
0 and 10000, inclusive.  The default setting for the @var{delay} variable is 
1000 (one second).

@item :set ttimeout
This option is used along with the @var{timeout} option to determine the 
behavior CGDB should have when it receives part of keyboard code sequence.  
If this option is on, CGDB will time out on key codes from the keyboard.  If
this option is off, CGDB will determine if it should time out on key codes
from the keyboard by examining the @var{timeout} option.  To determine how
CGDB will time out on key codes, what what time length it will use, please
refer to the chart in @ref{Key User Interface}.  The default value for this 
option is on.


@item :set ttm=@var{delay}
@itemx :set ttimeoutlen=@var{delay}
This option is used along with the @var{ttimeoutlen} option.  It 
represents the number of milliseconds that CGDB should wait for a key code
from the keyboard.  If @var{delay} is 0, CGDB immediately accepts each character 
it receives.  This will prevent any key codes to complete.  @var{delay} may 
be any value between 0 and 10000, inclusive.  The default setting for the 
@var{delay} variable is 100 (one tenth of a second).

@item :set ts=@var{number}
@itemx :set tabstop=@var{number}
Sets the number of spaces that should be rendered on the screen for @key{TAB}
characters.  The default value for @var{number} is 8.

@item :set wmh=@var{number}
@itemx :set winminheight=@var{number}
The minimal height of a window.  Windows will never become smaller than 
this value.  The default value for @var{number} is 0.

@item :set winsplit=@var{style}
Set the split point between source and GDB window.  This is especially useful
as an init setting in your @file{cgdbrc} file.  @xref{Configuring CGDB}.  The 
possible values for @var{style} are @samp{top_full}, @samp{top_big}, 
@samp{even}, @samp{bottom_big}, and @samp{bottom_full}.

@item :set ws
@itemx :set wrapscan
Searches wrap around the end of file.  The default is on.

@item :c
@itemx :continue
Send a continue command to GDB.

@itemx :down
Send a down command to GDB.

@item :e
@itemx :edit
reloads the file in the source window.  this can be useful if the file has 
changed since it was opened by cgdb.

@item :f
@itemx :finish
Send a finish command to GDB.

@item :help
This will display the current manual in text format, in the 
@dfn{source window}.

@item :hi @var{group} cterm=@var{attributes} ctermfg=@var{color} ctermbg=@var{color} term=@var{attributes}
@itemx :highlight @var{group} cterm=@var{attributes} ctermfg=@var{color} ctermbg=@var{color} term=@var{attributes}
Set the @var{color} and @var{attributes} for a highlighting group.  The syntax 
mimics vim's ``highlight'' command.  Possible values for @var{group}, 
@var{attributes} and @var{color} are available in @ref{Highlighting Groups}.

You can give as many or as few of the name=value pairs as you wish, in any 
order.  @samp{ctermfg} and @samp{ctermbg} set the foreground and background 
colors.  These can be specified by color number or by using the same color 
names that vim uses.  When CGDB is linked with ncurses, the number you use to
represent the color can be between -1 and COLORS.  When CGDB is linked against
curses, it must be between 0 and COLORS.  

@samp{cterm} sets the video attributes for color terminals.  @samp{term} sets
the video attributes for monochrome terminals.  Some examples are,
@smallexample
:highlight Logo cterm=bold,underline ctermfg=Red ctermbg=Black
:highlight Normal cterm=reverse ctermfg=White ctermbg=Black
:hi Normal term=bold
@end smallexample

@item :insert
Move focus to the GDB window.

@item :n
@itemx :next
Send a next command to GDB.

@item :q
@itemx :quit
Quit CGDB.

@item :r
@itemx :run
Send a run command to GDB.

@item :start
Send a start command to GDB.

@item :k
@itemx :kill
Send a kill command to GDB.

@item :s
@itemx :step
Send a step command to GDB.

@item :syntax
Turn the syntax on or off.

@itemx :up
Send an up command to GDB.

@item :map @var{lhs} @var{rhs}
Create a new mapping or overwrite an existing mapping in CGDB mode.  
After the command is run, if @var{lhs} is typed, CGDB will get @var{rhs} 
instead.  For more details on how to use the map command look in 
@ref{Using Maps}.
@item :unm @var{lhs}
@item :unmap @var{lhs}
Delete an existing mapping from CGDB mode.  @var{lhs} is what was typed
in the left hand side when the user created the mapping.  For example, if 
the user typed @code{:map a<Space>b foo} then the user could delete the
existing mapping with @code{:unmap a<Space>b}.
@item :im @var{lhs} @var{rhs}
@itemx :imap @var{lhs} @var{rhs}
Create a new mapping or overwrite an existing mapping in GDB mode.  
After the command is run, if @var{lhs} is typed, CGDB will get @var{rhs} 
instead.  For more details on how to use the map command look in 
@ref{Using Maps}.
@item :iu @var{lhs}
@item :iunmap @var{lhs}
Delete an existing mapping from GDB mode.  @var{lhs} is what was typed
in the left hand side when the user created the mapping.  For example, if 
the user typed @code{:imap a<Space>b foo} then the user could delete the
existing mapping with @code{:iunmap a<Space>b}.
@end table

@node Highlighting Groups
@chapter CGDB highlighting groups
@cindex highlighting groups

CGDB is capable of using colors if the terminal it is run in supports them.  
Until version 0.6.1, CGDB did not allow the user to configure these colors in
any way.  CGDB color use is now fully configurable.

CGDB's modeled its use of color highlighting after vim.  Any data that will
be colored in the terminal is represented by a highlighting group.  
A @dfn{highlighting group} represents data that should be formatted using
foreground colors, background colors and attributes.  There are currently 
several types of highlighting groups in CGDB.  There are syntax highlighting 
groups, which represent syntax highlighting of sources files.  There are also 
User Interface groups, which represent things like CGDB's logo, or the status 
bar.

Each highlighting group has a default set of attributes and colors associated 
with it.  You can modify a highlighting groups properties by using the
highlight command.  @xref{Configuring CGDB}.

Note that CGDB currently supports using the same background color the terminal 
was using before CGDB was started.  However, this only works when CGDB was
linked with ncurses.  If you link CGDB with curses, then CGDB will force
the background to Black.

@menu
* Available Highlighting Groups::         The different highlighting groups.
* Available Attributes::                  The different attributes.
* Available Colors::                      The different colors.
@end menu

@node Available Highlighting Groups
@section The different highlighting groups
@cindex highlighting groups

Below is a list of all the highlighting groups that CDGB will use when syntax 
highlighting source files.

@table @code
@item Statement
This represents the keywords a language defines.
@item Type
This represents the types a language defines.
@item Constant
This represents either a string or numeric value.
@item Comment
This represents the comments in a source file.
@item PreProc
This represents the C/C++ preprocessor commands.
@item Normal
This represents all normal text.
@end table

Below is a list of all the highlighting groups that CGDB will use when it is
displaying it's User Interface.

@table @code
@item StatusLine
This represents the @dfn{status bar} in CGDB.  The file dialog's status 
bar also uses this group.
@item IncSearch
This represents the group used when the user is searching in either the source 
window, or the @dfn{file dialog window}.
@item Arrow
This represents the arrow that CGDB draws to point to the currently viewed 
line.
@item LineHighlight
This represents the group used when the user has the @code{arrowstyle} option 
set to @code{highlight}.
@item Breakpoint
This represents the group that is used when CGDB displays a line that has a 
breakpoint set.
@item DisabledBreakpoint
This represents the group that is used when CGDB displays a line that has a 
disabled breakpoint set.
@item SelectedLineNr
This represents the group that is used when CGDB is displaying the currently
selected line.  This is the line that the cursor is on.
@item Logo
This is the group CGDB uses to display its logo on startup when no source 
file can be auto detected.
@end table


@node Available Attributes
@section The different attributes
@cindex attributes

CGDB supports many of the attributes that curses provides.  It will apply the
attributes to the output window, but it is up to the terminal you are using
to support such features.

The list of attributes that CGDB currently supports is below.

@table @code
@item normal
@itemx NONE
This will leave the text normal.  Uses A_NORMAL curses attribute.
@item bold
This will make the text appear bold.  Uses A_BOLD curses attribute.
@item underline
This will underline the text.  Uses A_UNDERLINE curses attribute.
@item reverse
@itemx inverse
This will reverse the foreground and background colors.  Uses A_REVERSE curses
attribute.
@item standout
This is the best highlighting mode of the terminal.  Uses A_STANDOUT curses 
attribute.
@item blink
This will cause the text to blink.  Uses A_BLINK curses attribute.
@item dim
This will cause the text to be 1/2 bright.  Uses A_DIM curses attribute.
@end table

@node Available Colors
@section The different colors
@cindex colors

CGDB supports several colors, depending on how many colors your terminal 
supports.  Below is a chart of the colors that CGDB provides.  The heading 
NR-16 is used to represent terminals that support at least 16 colors.  The
heading NR-8 is used to represent terminals that support at least 8 colors.  
The integer values for each color represent the values passed to the curses
function init_pair() to ask curses to create a new color.

@multitable @columnfractions .4 .2 .2 .2
@item @code{COLOR NAME}
@tab @code{NR-16}
@tab @code{NR-8}
@tab @code{NR-8 bold attribute}
@item Black
@tab 0
@tab 0
@tab No
@item DarkBlue
@tab 1
@tab 4
@tab No
@item DarkGreen
@tab 2
@tab 2
@tab No
@item DarkCyan
@tab 3
@tab 6
@tab No
@item DarkRed
@tab 4
@tab 1
@tab No
@item DarkMagenta
@tab 5
@tab 5
@tab No
@item Brown, DarkYellow
@tab 6
@tab 3
@tab No
@item LightGray, LightGrey, Gray, Grey
@tab 7
@tab 7
@tab No
@item DarkGray, DarkGrey
@tab 8
@tab 0
@tab Yes
@item Blue, LightBlue
@tab 9
@tab 4
@tab Yes
@item Green, LightGreen
@tab 10
@tab 2
@tab Yes
@item Cyan, LightCyan
@tab 11
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@item Red, LightRed
@tab 12
@tab 1
@tab Yes
@item Magenta, LightMagenta
@tab 13
@tab 5
@tab Yes
@item Yellow, LightYellow
@tab 14
@tab 3
@tab Yes
@item White
@tab 15
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@end multitable

@node Key User Interface
@chapter CGDB key user interface
@cindex CGDB key user interface

The Key User Interface is how CGDB receives input from the user.  It is 
usually referred to as the @dfn{KUI}.  CGDB simply asks the KUI for the next 
key the user typed and the KUI will provide it.  

The KUI has 2 major responsibilities besides reading normal user input 
and providing it to CGDB.  It needs to detect when the user has typed a 
user defined map or when the user has hit a special key on the keyboard.

A user defined map, or simply @dfn{map}, is used to change the meaning
of typed keys.  Some users may refer to this type of functionality as a 
@dfn{macro}.  An example would be @code{map a b}.  If the user then typed 
the @key{a} character, the KUI would detect that it was mapped to @key{b} 
and return @key{b} to CGDB.

When the user types a special key on the keyboard, a @dfn{key code} is
sent to CGDB.  Typically, keys like  @kbd{HOME}, @kbd{DEL}, @key{F1}, etc,
when pressed will send several characters to the application instead of just
one character like a normal key does.  These characters combined are called a
@dfn{key sequence}.  The KUI is responsible for assembling the key sequences 
back together and reporting to CGDB that a particular key was typed by the 
user.  The @kbd{ESC} key is special because typically most key codes start with 
that key.  This usually gives all key codes a common first key in its key 
sequence.  The KUI uses the terminfo database to determine what key sequences 
are sent by which keycodes.  There are a few commonly used key sequences 
that are hard coded into CGDB.

A major challenge the KUI has to overcome is determining when a map or a 
key sequence is received.  The KUI sometimes will need to read more than
one character to determine this.  For example, if the user has 2 maps, 
@code{map abc def} and @code{map abd def}, the KUI would have to buffer at 
least the characters @key{a} and @key{b} before it could determine if the 
user was going to type a map.  After the next key press, if the user types 
@key{c} or @key{d} then a map was received and the KUI will return 
@kbd{d e f} to CGDB.  Otherwise, no map was received and the KUI must return 
@kbd{a b} to CGDB.

The options @var{timeout}, @var{ttimeout}, @var{timeoutlen} and 
@var{ttimeoutlen} can be used to tell the KUI if it should timeout on
partial mappings or key sequences, and if so, how long it should wait before
timing out.  

@menu
* Configuring the KUI Time Out Options::        The KUI's time out options
* Using Maps::                                  Using maps
* Understanding Keycodes::                      Understanding keycodes
@end menu

@node Configuring the KUI Time Out Options
@section The KUI's time out options
@cindex timeout
@cindex ttimeout
@cindex timeoutlen
@cindex ttimeoutlen

The KUI may be configured to time out on either maps or key sequences.

When the KUI is matching a partial map or key sequence it is capable
of timing out.  This means it will simply accepts the keys it has received so 
far if a certain amount of time elapses between key presses.  This is 
obvious when the user is typing a map because the user must press each key
individually.  For partial key sequences, this is less obvious.  That is 
because the user only presses a single key, but multiple characters are sent 
to CGDB.  The table below describes how the user can configure the KUI
to time out on key codes or maps.  The @var{timeout} and @var{ttimeout}
options control this functionality.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .15 .45
@headitem timeout @tab ttimeout @tab action
@item off
@tab off
@tab do not time out
@item on
@tab on or off
@tab time out on maps and key codes
@item off
@tab on
@tab time out on key codes
@end multitable

It is also possible to tell the KUI how long to wait before timing out on 
a partial match.  If @var{timeout} is on, then the KUI will wait a certain
amount of time for the next character, when matching a map, before it 
decides a match is no longer possible.  If @var{timeout} or 
@var{ttimeout} is on, then the KUI will wait a certain amount of time for 
the next character, when matching a key sequence, before it decides a 
match is no longer possible.  The @var{timeoutlen} and @var{ttimeoutlen}
options can be configured by the user to tell the KUI how long to wait
before timing out.  The table below describes when the KUI uses which 
option.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .2 .2
@headitem timeoutlen @tab mapping delay @tab key code delay
@item < 0
@tab @var{timeoutlen}
@tab @var{timeoutlen}
@item >= 0
@tab @var{timeoutlen}
@tab @var{ttimeoutlen}
@end multitable

A value of 0 means that the KUI will time out right away.  It will not be 
possible to match a map or key code in this circumstance.

A common problem could be that when the user types a special key like 
the left or right arrows, CGDB will go into the source mode and not 
perform the action requested by the user.  This typically means that the
key code delay is to small.  If you try setting the option 
@code{set ttimeoutlen=1000} CGDB should start acting like the user expects.
If not, please report this to the CGDB mailing list.

@node Using Maps
@section Using maps

CGDB fully supports the use of maps.  It allows the user to change the 
meaning of typed keys. For example, you could have the following map 
@code{:map <F2> ip<Space>argc<CR>}.

When the user is in CGDB mode and they hit @key{F2}, the value of the map
will be used instead.  The @kbd{i} key will first be received by CGDB, and
it will put the user into insert mode.  Next, CGDB will get @kbd{p argc}
followed by the @key{Enter} key.

CGDB currently supports two mapping lists.  Any mapping that was added 
with the @var{map} command will be used by CGDB when it is in CGDB mode.
You can delete a mapping that you have created with the @var{map} command
with the @var{unmap} command.  If you want to have mappings in GDB mode, you 
can use the @var{imap} command.  Similarly, @var{iunmap} will delete a
mapping in the @var{imap} set.  Some examples of this would be 
@example
map a<Space>b foo
unmap a<Space>b

imap a<CR>b foo
iunmap a<CR>b
@end example

@node Understanding Keycodes
@section Understanding keycodes

The above example could use a little more explaining for people unfamiliar
with vim maps.  The map takes a key and a value.  They are separated by
a space.  Neither the key or value can have a space in them, or it is
considered to be the separator between the key and value.  If the user 
desires to have a space in either the key or value part of a map, they can
use the keycode notation <Space>.  Below is a table of the
keycodes in @dfn{keycode notation} form.  The keycode notation can be 
used in any mapping command.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .4
@headitem notation @tab meaning
@item <Esc>
@tab escape key
@item <Up>
@tab cursor up key
@item <Down>
@tab cursor down key
@item <Left>
@tab cursor left key
@item <Right>
@tab cursor right key
@item <Home>
@tab home key
@item <End>
@tab end key
@item <PageUp>
@tab page up key
@item <PageDown>
@tab page down key
@item <Del>
@tab delete key
@item <Insert>
@tab insert key
@item <Nul>
@tab zero
@item <Bs>
@tab backspace key
@item <Tab>
@tab tab key
@item <NL>
@tab linefeed
@item <FF>
@tab formfeed
@item <CR>
@tab carriage return
@item <Space>
@tab space
@item <Lt>
@tab less-than
@item <Bslash>
@tab backslash
@item <Bar>
@tab vertical bar
@item <F1> - <F12>
@tab function keys 1 to 12
@item <C-...>
@tab control keys
@item <S-...>
@tab shift keys
@end multitable

@node Sending I/O to Inferior
@chapter Sending I/O to the program being debugged
@cindex sending I/O to inferior

If the program being debugged takes input on the terminal it is recommended
that the user start the program on one terminal, and attach to it with CGDB
from another terminal.  This is the easiest way to pass input to the 
debugged program.

However, if the user wishes to pass input to the program being debugged from
within CGDB, there is a mechanism available for doing so.  As of this writing, 
the technique described below does not work on windows, using a natively 
compiled GDB.  It may work when using the GDB that comes with Cygwin.

This technique is similar to getting in and out of @dfn{GDB mode}.  The tty 
window is not visible by default.  This is because it is only needed if the 
user wishes to send data to the program being debugged.  To display the tty 
window, hit @kbd{T} while in command mode.  After hitting @kbd{T} you will 
notice that there is another window in the middle of the @dfn{source window} 
and the @dfn{gdb window}.  This is called the @dfn{tty window}. You will also 
see a new status bar called the tty status bar.  There will be a @samp{*} on 
the tty status bar after the @kbd{T} was hit.  This is because when the 
window is opened with the @kbd{T} command, CGDB automatically puts the user 
into @dfn{TTY mode}.  To get out of this window hit the cgdb mode key.  
This will put you back into command mode.  To make the tty window appear and 
disappear hit the @kbd{T} key while in command mode.  It is a toggle.

Once the tty window is already open, the user can then hit @kbd{I} in
command mode to get into @dfn{TTY mode}.  The user can then hit the 
cgdb mode key in the @dfn{TTY mode} to get back into command mode.

When the tty window is open, all data that comes from the program, goes
there.  Any data typed into the tty window will ONLY go to the program
being debugged.  It will not go to GDB. When the tty window is closed,
all output from the debugged program will go to the @dfn{GDB window} AND to
the @dfn{tty window} (for viewing later when the tty window is opened). 

If the user wishes to get a new tty for the program being debugged then
they can type @kbd{Ctrl-T}.  This will delete all the buffered data
waiting to be read into the debugged program. This might be useful when
you rerun or start a new program.

@node Terminal Control Flow
@chapter Allowing terminal control flow in CGDB
@cindex terminal control flow

A user can typically set there control flow behavior by using the stty 
command like so @code{stty -ixon -ixoff}.  This will disable control flow on
the terminal where CGDB is started.  If you want to turn control flow back 
on you can type @code{stty ixon ixoff}.  If flow control is on, when the user
types @kbd{Ctrl-s}, the terminal stops.  When the user types @kbd{Ctrl-q}, the 
terminal restarts.  When using readline, the @kbd{Ctrl-s} character usually does 
a forward search.  So, if you want to get this, or other functionality out of 
readline, simply turn off control flow and start CGDB.

@node Building CGDB
@chapter Building CGDB from source
@cindex building CGDB

Building CGDB from source requires several packages. First, CGDB is hosted
at http://sf.net/projects/cgdb. You can determine how to get CGDB from source 
by looking here: http://sourceforge.net/svn/?group_id=72581.

Once you have the source to CGDB, now you can begin to build it.  You will of 
course need many packages to build CGDB. Below is a list of all of them 
that are required to build CGDB.

@table @code
@item GNU Make
I have successfully used version 3.79.1, however, older versions probably 
will work.

@item GNU GCC
The GNU C compiler. I've compiled CGDB with versions as old as 2.9.5, and as
new as 4.0.2.

@item GNU Readline
The GNU readline library version 5.1. CGDB will not work with versions before 
5.1.  Readline was modified specifically to work with CGDB.

@item GNU Ncurses
I have successfully used libncurses.so.5 successfully.  However, older versions
probably will work.
@end table

Below is a list of optional packages you will need, if modifying certain files
in CGDB.

@table @code
@item GNU Flex
If you modify any files with an extension of @code{.l}, you will have to have 
flex installed.  I have used flex 2.5.4 to build CGDB.

@item GNU Texinfo
If you modify @file{doc/cgdb.texinfo}, then you will be required to have this 
package installed.  I have used version 4.7 to build the documentation for 
CGDB.

@item help2man
If you are doing a release, then you will be required to have this package
installed.  In the @file{doc/} build directory, you can execute the command 
@code{make cgdb.1}, and the CGDB man page will be generated.
@end table

CGDB uses autoconf/automake to build its configure scripts and makefiles.  So, 
if you change any of the autoconf/automake files, you will need this software 
installed.

@table @code
@item GNU Automake
This has the program aclocal, and must be version Version 1.9.5.

@item GNU Autoconf
This has the program autoconf, and must be version 2.59.

@item GNU m4
This has the program m4, and must be version 1.4.3.
@end table

@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

